README.adoc, before:

= bigmailer: OpenBSD _smtpctl spf walk_ starter kit

This facility is listed as https://openbsd.org[OpenBSD]-specific as it
depends on both the pf(8) facility and the https://opensmtpd.org[smtpd(8)]
daemon's helper program, smtpctl(8).  That said, the output of _smtpctl spf
walk_ is text, and text is easy to reform.
If you find a way to use this on other platforms, great - we'd love to be
cross-platform.

== Bit o' history

When the internet was young, everybody ran their own mail server - singular.
SPAM came along. GreyListing was one of several good responses to it.
Then big mailers grew multiple servers AND were too lazy to implement
"server affinity" - keep trying to send a given message from a given IP.
Instead, they send a message from a randomly-chosen server each time they retry
after the greylisting delays it...
This broke greylisting, as the message would come from a different IP each
time, which would get added to the ever-growing grey list, but the message
would rarely get through.

Fortunately, there's a solution to this problem too. Sender Policy Framework
(SPF) requires mail senders to list all the hosts (or groups, using CIDR notation)
that their mail can come from.
So now, smtpd's helper program smtpctl has the capability to
read the SPF information from each of a list of "big mailer" domains, and
list them in a form which our pfctl can accept.

== HowTo for OpenBSD users

TL:DR; for OpenBSD-current as of 2018-01-11, or 6.3+:

. copy _bigmailers.txt_ to _/etc/mail/_;
. Set a pf rule to let table _spf-white_ bypass the spamd redirection;
. Install the body of _scripts/run_ in a weekly root cron entry or in /etc/weekly.local
. Optionally use the scripts in _scripts_ for debugging/analysis.

Assuming you have installed file called _bigmailers.txt_
(from this repo) into /etc/mail, you can just execute
something like this, either by hand or out of cron (weekly?):

	# smtpctl spf walk < /etc/mail/bigmailers.txt | pfctl -t spf-white -T add -f -

This is what the _run_ script in the _scripts_ folder does.
Assuming you have pf redirect incoming SMTP into greylisting, and you have
a filter rule that bypasses hosts in the table spf-white, mail from
the big mailers will come right in. Along with any SPAM they send, of course.

	pass in quick on egress proto tcp from <spf-white> to any port smtp
	pass in quick on egress proto tcp from any to any port smtp \
				 rdr-to 127.0.0.1 port spamd

It is good that `pf` is very efficient at handling tables, as the very
first verion of bigmailers.txt in this repo, 12 domains,
generated almost 500 IP netgroups. After removing one redundant entry:

	$ doas scripts/walk | wc -l
		 451
	$

== HowTo for non-OpenBSD users

This will be added when you contribute it.

== Contribute

Pull requests for "major" bigmailers that don't do server affinity 
will be gratefully accepted, as long as they:

. keep the list in alphabetical order;
. don't list your local public school or Cadillac dealer
that has two mail servers,
as most of the world will never get email from them;
. provide proof in the comments field, such as spamd output showing
two more more different IPs trying to send the same message, like so:

----
Jan 13 17:32:13 darwinsys spamd[24416]: (GREY) 1.2.3.187: <spammer@bigmailer.com> -> <covfefe123@darwinsys.com>
Jan 13 17:38:63 darwinsys spamd[24416]: (GREY) 1.2.3.167: <spammer@bigmailer.com> -> <covfefe123@darwinsys.com>
----

Pulls for making things work on other platforms will also be considered,
as long as they don't detract from the main focus.

Pull requests constitute acceptance of the (un)license in LICENSE.txt.
Contributions become public domain.

The original code contributions that made this possible
are documented https://poolp.org/posts/2018-01-08/spfwalk/[here].

Commit message:

Talk about a local file too; fix typo

README.adoc, after:

= bigmailer: OpenBSD _smtpctl spf walk_ starter kit

This facility is listed as https://openbsd.org[OpenBSD]-specific as it
depends on both the pf(8) facility and the https://opensmtpd.org[smtpd(8)]
daemon's helper program, smtpctl(8).  That said, the output of _smtpctl spf
walk_ is text, and text is easy to reform.
If you find a way to use this on other platforms, great - we'd love to be
cross-platform.

== Bit o' history

When the internet was young, everybody ran their own mail server - singular.
SPAM came along. GreyListing was one of several good responses to it.
Then big mailers grew multiple servers AND were too lazy to implement
"server affinity" - keep trying to send a given message from a given IP.
Instead, they send a message from a randomly-chosen server each time they retry
after the greylisting delays it...
This broke greylisting, as the message would come from a different IP each
time, which would get added to the ever-growing grey list, but the message
would rarely get through.

Fortunately, there's a solution to this problem too. Sender Policy Framework
(SPF) requires mail senders to list all the hosts (or groups, using CIDR notation)
that their mail can come from.
So now, smtpd's helper program smtpctl has the capability to
read the SPF information from each of a list of "big mailer" domains, and
list them in a form which our pfctl can accept.

== HowTo for OpenBSD users

TL:DR; for OpenBSD-current as of 2018-01-11, or 6.3+:

. copy _bigmailers.txt_ to _/etc/mail/_;
. Set a pf rule to let table _spf-white_ bypass the spamd redirection;
. Install the body of _scripts/run_ in a weekly root cron entry or in /etc/weekly.local
. Optionally use the scripts in _scripts_ for debugging/analysis.

Assuming you have installed file called _bigmailers.txt_
(from this repo) into /etc/mail, you can just execute
something like this, either by hand or out of cron (weekly?):

	# smtpctl spf walk < /etc/mail/bigmailers.txt | pfctl -t spf-white -T add -f -

or, if you want to keep this file intact and add a bigmailers-local.txt:

	# cat /etc/mail/bigmailers*.txt | smtpctl spf walk | pfctl -t spf-white -T add -f -

This is what the _run_ script in the _scripts_ folder does.
Assuming you have pf redirect incoming SMTP into greylisting, and you have
a filter rule that bypasses hosts in the table spf-white, mail from
the big mailers will come right in. 
Along with any SPAM their customers send, of course.

	pass in quick on egress proto tcp from <spf-white> to any port smtp
	pass in quick on egress proto tcp from any to any port smtp \
				 rdr-to 127.0.0.1 port spamd

It is good that `pf` is very efficient at handling tables, as the very
first version of bigmailers.txt in this repo, 12 domains,
generated almost 500 IP netgroups. After removing one redundant entry:

	$ doas scripts/walk | wc -l
		 451
	$

== HowTo for non-OpenBSD users

This will be added when you contribute it.

== Contribute

Pull requests for "major" bigmailers that don't do server affinity 
will be gratefully accepted, as long as they:

. keep the list in alphabetical order;
. don't list your local public school or Cadillac dealer
that has two mail servers,
as most of the world will never get email from them;
. provide proof in the comments field, such as spamd output showing
two more more different IPs trying to send the same message, like so:

----
Jan 13 17:32:13 darwinsys spamd[24416]: (GREY) 1.2.3.187: <spammer@bigmailer.com> -> <covfefe123@darwinsys.com>
Jan 13 17:38:63 darwinsys spamd[24416]: (GREY) 1.2.3.167: <spammer@bigmailer.com> -> <covfefe123@darwinsys.com>
----

Pulls for making things work on other platforms will also be considered,
as long as they don't detract from the main focus.

Pull requests constitute acceptance of the (un)license in LICENSE.txt.
Contributions become public domain.

The original code contributions that made this possible
are documented https://poolp.org/posts/2018-01-08/spfwalk/[here].
